A proposition is a declarative sentence (that is, a sentence that declares a fact) that is either true or false, but not both.
We use letters to denote propositional variables(or sentential variables), that is, variables that represent propositions, just as letters are used to denote numerical variables. The conventional letters used for propositional variables are p, q, r, s, … . The truth value of a proposition

A proposition that cannot be broken into smaller propositions are atomic propositions
## Negation operator
The negation operator constructs a new proposition from a single existing proposition
If true proposition is negated then it would result in false truth value

Let p be a proposition. The negation of p, denoted by ¬p (also denoted by p), is the statement “It is not the case that p.”
Although ¬p and p are the most common notations used in mathematics to express the negation of p, other notations you might see are ∼p, −p, p′ , Np, and !p.

| $p$ | $\neg p$ |
| --- | -------- |
| $T$ | $F$      |
| $F$ | $T$      |
## Connectives

### AND ($\land$)
Let p and q be propositions. The conjunction of p and q, denoted by p ∧ q, is the proposition “p and q.” The conjunction p ∧ q is true when both p and q are true and is false otherwise.

Example sentence
You're smart and tall

Truth table:

| $p$ | $q$ | $p\land q$ |
| --- | --- | ---------- |
| $T$ | $T$ | $T$        |
| $T$ | $F$ | $F$        |
| $F$ | $T$ | $F$        |
| $F$ | $F$ | $F$        |

### OR ($\lor$)
Let p and q be propositions. The disjunction of p and q, denoted by p ∨ q, is the proposition “p or q.” The disjunction p ∨ q is false when both p and q are false and is true otherwise

Example sentence:
You're tall or smart
Notice doesn't mean that both cannot occur

Truth table:

| $p$ | $q$ | $p\lor q$ |
| --- | --- | --------- |
| $T$ | $T$ | $T$       |
| $T$ | $F$ | $T$       |
| $F$ | $T$ | $T$       |
| $F$ | $F$ | $F$       |
### Exclusive Or (XOR) ($\oplus$)
Let p and q be propositions. The exclusive or of p and q, denoted by p ⊕ q (or p XOR q), is the proposition that is true when exactly one of p and q is true and is false otherwise.

Example sentence:
You're either dumb or smart

Truth table:

| $p$ | $q$ | $p\oplus q$ |
| --- | --- | ----------- |
| $T$ | $T$ | $F$         |
| $T$ | $F$ | $T$         |
| $F$ | $T$ | $T$         |
| $F$ | $F$ | $F$         |
### Implication (If) ($\rightarrow$)
Let p and q be propositions. The conditional statement p → q is the proposition “if p, then q.” The conditional statement p → q is false when p is true and q is false, and true otherwise. In the conditional statement p → q, p is called the hypothesis (or antecedent or premise) and q is called the conclusion (or consequence).

Example sentence
If I'm dumb i will fail the class

Truth table:

| $p$ | $q$ | $p\leftrightarrow q$ |
| --- | --- | -------------------- |
| $T$ | $T$ | $T$                  |
| $T$ | $F$ | $F$                  |
| $F$ | $T$ | $T$                  |
| $F$ | $F$ | $T$                  |
### Biconditional (Iff) ($\leftrightarrow$)
Let p and q be propositions. The biconditional statement p ↔ q is the proposition “p if and only if q.” The biconditional statement p ↔ q is true when p and q have the same truth values, and is false otherwise. Biconditional statements are also called bi-implications.

Example sentence
Only if I'm dumb i will fail the class

Truth table:

| $p$ | $q$ | $p\rightarrow q$ |
| --- | --- | ---------------- |
| $T$ | $T$ | $T$              |
| $T$ | $F$ | $F$              |
| $F$ | $T$ | $F$              |
| $F$ | $F$ | $T$              |

## Tautologies
A Tautology is a formula which is always true for every value of its propositional variables.

Simple example $(p \rightarrow q) \lor (q \rightarrow p)$

| $p$ | $q$ | $p \rightarrow q$ | $q \rightarrow p$ | $(p \rightarrow q) \lor (q \rightarrow p)$ |
| --- | --- | ----------------- | ----------------- | ------------------------------------------ |
| $T$ | $T$ | $T$               | $T$               | $T$                                        |
| $T$ | $F$ | $F$               | $T$               | $T$                                        |
| $F$ | $T$ | $T$               | $F$               | $T$                                        |
| $F$ | $F$ | $T$               | $T$               | $T$                                        |

## Contradictions
A Contradiction is a formula which is always false for every value of its propositional variables.

Simple example $p \land \neg p$

| $p$ | $p \land \neg p$ |
| --- | ---------------- |
| $T$ | $F$              |
| $T$ | $F$              |
| $F$ | $F$              |
| $F$ | $F$              |

## Contingency
A Contingency is a formula which has both some true and some false values for every value of its propositional variables.

**Example** − Prove $(q∨p)∧(¬q)$ a contingency

| $p$ | $q$ | $\neg p$ | $q∨p$ | $(q∨p)∧(¬q)$ |
| --- | --- | -------- | ----- | ------------ |
| $T$ | $T$ | $F$      | $T$   | $F$          |
| $T$ | $F$ | $F$      | $T$   | $F$          |
| $F$ | $T$ | $T$      | $T$   | $T$          |
| $F$ | $F$ | $T$      | $F$   | $F$          |

It is a contingency because truth tables show mixed truths from every value

## Inverse, Converse, and Contra-positive

**Example of Conditional Statement** − “If you do your homework, you will not be punished.” Here, "you do your homework" is the hypothesis, p, and "you will not be punished" is the conclusion, q.

### Inverse
An inverse of the conditional statement is the negation of both the hypothesis and the conclusion. If the statement is “If p, then q”, the inverse will be “If not p, then not q”. Thus the inverse of $p→q$ is $¬p→¬q$

Example − The inverse of “If you do your homework, you will not be punished” is “If you do not do your homework, you will be punished.”

### Converse 
The converse of the conditional statement is computed by interchanging the hypothesis and the conclusion. If the statement is “If p, then q”, the converse will be “If q, then p”. The converse of $p→q$ is $q→p$

**Example** − The converse of "If you do your homework, you will not be punished" is "If you will not be punished, you do your homework”.

### Contra-positive
The contra-positive of the conditional is computed by interchanging the hypothesis and the conclusion of the inverse statement. If the statement is “If p, then q”, the contra-positive will be “If not q, then not p”. The contra-positive of $p→q$ is $¬q→¬p$

**Example** − The Contra-positive of " If you do your homework, you will not be punished” is "If you are punished, you did not do your homework”.

## Bit operations
Computers represent information using bits. A bit is a symbol with two possible values, namely, 0 (zero) and 1 (one). This meaning of the word bit comes from binary digit, because zeros and ones are the digits used in binary representations of numbers.

Computer bit operations correspond to the logical connectives. By replacing true by a one and false by a zero in the truth tables for the operators ∧, ∨, and ⊕.

| $x$ | $y$ | $x \land y$ | $x\lor y$ | $x\oplus y$ |
| --- | --- | ----------- | --------- | ----------- |
| $1$ | $1$ | $1$         | $0$       | $0$         |
| $1$ | $0$ | $0$         | $0$       | $1$         |
| $2$ | $1$ | $0$         | $0$       | $1$         |
| $2$ | $0$ | $0$         | $1$       | $0$         |
### Bit string 
is a sequence of zero or more bits. The length of this string is the number of bits in the string.

We can extend bit operations to bit strings. We define the bitwise OR, bitwise AND, and bitwise XOR of two strings of the same length to be the strings that have as their bits the OR, AND, and XOR of the corresponding bits in the two strings, respectively. We use the symbols ∨, ∧, and ⊕ to represent the bitwise OR, bitwise AND, and bitwise XOR operations, respectively.

$\begin{array}{cc cccc cccc} & 0 & 1 & & 1 & 0 & 1 & 1 & & 0 & 1 & 1 & 0 & \\ & 1 & 1 & & 0 & 0 & 0 & 1 & & 1 & 1 & 0 & 1 & \\ \hline & 1 & 1 & & 1 & 0 & 1 & 1 & & 1 & 1 & 1 & 1 & \text{OR} \\ & 0 & 1 & & 0 & 0 & 0 & 1 & & 0 & 1 & 0 & 0 & \text{AND} \\ & 1 & 0 & & 1 & 0 & 1 & 0 & & 1 & 0 & 1 & 1 & \text{XOR} \\ \end{array}$


## Logical equivalences

Commutative properties: 
$p \vee q \equiv q \vee p$
$p \wedge q \equiv q \wedge p$

Associative properties: 
$(p \vee q) \vee r \equiv p \vee (q \vee r)$
$(p \wedge q) \wedge r \equiv p \wedge (q \wedge r)$

Distributive laws
$p \vee (q \wedge r) \equiv (p \vee q) \wedge (p \vee r)$
$p \wedge (q \vee r) \equiv (p \wedge q) \vee (p \wedge r)$

Idempotent laws: 
$p \vee p \equiv p$
$p \wedge p \equiv p$

**De Morgan’s laws**
$\neg(p\vee q) \equiv \neg{p}\wedge\neg{q}$
$\neg(p\wedge q) \equiv \neg{p}\vee \neg{q}$

Laws of the excluded middle, or inverse laws:
$p \vee \neg{p} \equiv T$
$p \wedge \neg{p} \equiv F$

Identity laws:
$p \vee F \equiv p$
$p \wedge T \equiv p$

Domination laws:
$p \vee T \equiv T$
$p \wedge F \equiv F$

Equivalence of an implication and its contrapositive:
$p \rightarrow q \equiv \neg{q} \rightarrow \neg{p}$

Writing an implication as a disjunction:
$p \rightarrow q \equiv \neg{p} \vee q$

The negation of an implication:
$\neg(p \rightarrow q) \equiv p \wedge \neg{q}$
